layout: single
title:  "Using Census data to understand shifts in the electorate"
<!---"Youth voters make up smallest share of US electorate ever"--->
date:   2020-4-1
---

After Super Tuesday, Young voters were often scapegoated by the media for Bernie’s loses in Super Tuesday contests (e.g. [Many young voters sat out Super Tuesday, contributing to Bernie Sanders’ losses](https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2020/03/04/super-tuesday-bernie-sanders-youth-votes-fell-short-compared-2016/4947795002/)). Their reasoning was that a lot of [polling](https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2020/02/this-one-chart-explains-why-young-voters-back-bernie-sanders.html) before Super Tuesday showed Bernie strongly favored by younger voters and strongly disfavored by older voters. So for Bernie to have lost, young people must not have made it to the polls. Does exiting polling support this idea? To see, I compared the available 2020 CNN exit (and entrance) [polling](https://www.cnn.com/election/2020/entrance-and-exit-polls/) numbers to those in [2016](https://www.cnn.com/election/2016/primaries/polls/) for states that voted on or before Super Tuesday in both years. As can be seen in the following table, exit polling shows that youth voters made up a smaller percentage of voters in 13 of 15 states in 2020.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/youth_vote_post/youth_voter_turnout_wtitle.png" alt="Voter Turnout for 18-29 year-olds in Democratic Presidential Primaries" caption="Voter Turnout for 18-29 year-olds in Democratic Presidential Primaries" %}

[1] [Source](https://www.cnn.com/election/2016/primaries/polls/)
[2] [Source](https://www.cnn.com/election/2020/entrance-and-exit-polls/)

While the margin of error of exit polls is typically 3-4%, averages are more robust. The average difference in youth voter turnout in these 15 states is -2.4%. Weighted by the number of 2020 voters in each state, the weighted average is even larger, -2.8%. But when you consider the total number of young voters who cast votes in these 15 contests, you see that more young voters voted this year than 4 years ago. For example, in Texas the youth turn out went down from 5% but the total number of youth voters increased by about 25,000. So how can both changes be true? Of course, it means there were more older voters by percentage AND total number this year. This made me wonder, could this be explained by the aging population of the US alone or did the propensity of older voter have changed, too?  And, how will projected demographic changes effect electorate compositions in future elections?

To begin to answer these questions, I turned to the Census Bureau, which has estimated the populations of the US since it was founded in 1902 and hosts their population estimates [online](https://www.census.gov/). I was able to find the US population broken down by single year of age since the year 1900. Given that the data was collected at various times over more than a century, the data isn’t perfectly homogenous in structure. For example, the only available data from 1900-1929 excludes Armed Forces overseas and the population residing in Alaska and Hawaii, the 1930-1959 numbers include Armed Forces overseas but excluded the population residing in Alaska and Hawaii, and the 2010s data includes the most granular demographic breakdowns of the population of all decades. I decided to use the data that includes Armed Forces overseas as the default because in principle they could vote (although, in practice, I suspect it has been difficult to impossible). Methods for accessing the data varies, too, from excel spreadsheets on a webpage, like for [1900-1979](https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/pre-1980-national.html), to the Census Population Estimates [APIs](https://www.census.gov/data/developers/data-sets/popest-popproj/popest.html) for years 1990 to 2019. The python code I used to corral and clean the data can be found in a Jupyter Notebook on my GitHub page here (link). 

With the US population per single year of age in every year from 1900 to 2020 (and projected out to 2060), I was able to calculate and plot the fraction of the population that falls in the category of youth voter (aged 18-29). 


To first order, the most obvious feature of this plot is the general trend downwards from 37% in 1900 to 21% in 2020. The next most significant feature is the large bump from about 1965 to 1995, when the baby boomer generation aged into and then out of the 18-29 age range. Also noticeable in the figure is a relatively small dip around 1918 when more than 4 million service people were overseas for WWI. This is the only wartime period with such a dip because the census population worksheets I found included the Armed Forces overseas after 1940. 

Since 1972, when the major parties tied delegates to the outcomes of state primaries, the fraction of the population comprised of 18-29 year-olds has decreased from 29% to 21%. This means that young people were outnumbered by older Americans ~2:1 in 1970 and ~4:1 in 2020.

# Can the aging US population explain the drop in youth voter turnout between 2016 and 2020 alone?
So, back to the question of whether aging US population could explain the drop in youth voter turnout between 2016 and 2020, all else being equal. The short answer is, No. I found the population aged 18-29 has shrunk by ~260,000 from March 3, 2016 to Mar 3, 2020 (by interpolating the yearly Census data) and the over 30 population has grown by ~8,765,000 in the same timespan. In terms of the youth voter fraction of the electorate, this results in a decrease of 0.7% from 21.6% on Super Tuesday in 2016 (March 1) to 20.9% in on Super Tuesday in 2016 (March 3). In other words, if all voter demographic groups voted at the same rates as in 2016, the youth turnout would appear to decease by only 0.7% in 2020 simply due to changes in populations. Since this is less than the median decrease in the youth voter turnout seen in 2020 exit polling, -2.8%, something in addition to demographics change is needed to fully explain how the youth voter turnout could decrease by percent while increase in total number. I suspect it is easy for the 80% of older population that votes to recruit a few percent of the cohort to join them than the the 30% of 18-30-year-olds who vote to get the equivalent number of their peers to vote. Perhaps in another blog post I figure out how many friends young voters would have to recruit each just to overcome the shifting demographics.

# How will projected demographic changes effect electorate compositions in future elections?
Looking at the youth fraction plot at years after 2020, we see a steady decline to about 17% in 2060. This suggests that all future presidential campaign relying on the youth vote will have an uphill battle ahead.